<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII: An Adventure on the Tory Road</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">An Adventure on the Tory Road</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>‚ÄúAnne,‚Äù said Davy, sitting up in bed and propping his chin on his hands, ‚ÄúAnne, where is sleep? People go to sleep every night, and of course I know it‚Äôs the place where I do the things I dream, but I want to know <em>where</em> it is and how I get there and back without knowing anything about it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and in my nighty too. Where is it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne was kneeling at the west gable window watching the sunset sky that was like a great flower with petals of crocus and a heart of fiery yellow. She turned her head at Davy‚Äôs question and answered dreamily,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄòOver the mountains of the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down the valley of the shadow.‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Paul Irving would have known the meaning of this, or made a meaning out of it for himself, if he didn‚Äôt; but practical Davy, who, as Anne often despairingly remarked, hadn‚Äôt a particle of imagination, was only puzzled and disgusted.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnne, I believe you‚Äôre just talking nonsense.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course I was, dear boy. Don‚Äôt you know that it is only very foolish folk who talk sense all the time?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I think you might give a sensible answer when I ask a sensible question,‚Äù said Davy in an injured tone.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, you are too little to understand,‚Äù said Anne. But she felt rather ashamed of saying it; for had she not, in keen remembrance of many similar snubs administered in her own early years, solemnly vowed that she would never tell any child it was too little to understand? Yet here she was doing it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ so wide sometimes is the gulf between theory and practice.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I‚Äôm doing my best to grow,‚Äù said Davy, ‚Äúbut it‚Äôs a thing you can‚Äôt hurry much. If Marilla wasn‚Äôt so stingy with her jam I believe I‚Äôd grow a lot faster.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMarilla is not stingy, Davy,‚Äù said Anne severely. ‚ÄúIt is very ungrateful of you to say such a thing.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs another word that means the same thing and sounds a lot better, but I don‚Äôt just remember it,‚Äù said Davy, frowning intently. ‚ÄúI heard Marilla say she was it, herself, the other day.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you mean <em>economical</em>, it‚Äôs a <em>very</em> different thing from being stingy. It is an excellent trait in a person if she is economical. If Marilla had been stingy she wouldn‚Äôt have taken you and Dora when your mother died. Would you have liked to live with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝWiggins?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou just bet I wouldn‚Äôt!‚Äù Davy was emphatic on that point. ‚ÄúNor I don‚Äôt want to go out to Uncle Richard neither. I‚Äôd far rather live here, even if Marilla is that long-tailed word when it comes to jam, ‚Äôcause <em>you</em>‚Äôre here, Anne. Say, Anne, won‚Äôt you tell me a story ‚Äôfore I go to sleep? I don‚Äôt want a fairy story. They‚Äôre all right for girls, I s‚Äôpose, but I want something exciting‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ lots of killing and shooting in it, and a house on fire, and in‚Äôtrusting things like that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Fortunately for Anne, Marilla called out at this moment from her room,</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnne, Diana‚Äôs signalling at a great rate. You‚Äôd better see what she wants.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne ran to the east gable and saw flashes of light coming through the twilight from Diana‚Äôs window in groups of five, which meant, according to their old childish code, ‚ÄúCome over at once for I have something important to reveal.‚Äù Anne threw her white shawl over her head and hastened through the Haunted Wood and across <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBell‚Äôs pasture corner to Orchard Slope.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve good news for you, Anne,‚Äù said Diana. ‚ÄúMother and I have just got home from Carmody, and I saw Mary Sentner from Spencervale in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBlair‚Äôs store. She says the old Copp girls on the Tory Road have a willowware platter and she thinks it‚Äôs exactly like the one we had at the supper. She says they‚Äôll likely sell it, for Martha Copp has never been known to keep anything she <em>could</em> sell; but if they won‚Äôt there‚Äôs a platter at Wesley Keyson‚Äôs at Spencervale and she knows they‚Äôd sell it, but she isn‚Äôt sure it‚Äôs just the same kind as Aunt Josephine‚Äôs.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll go right over to Spencervale after it tomorrow,‚Äù said Anne resolutely, ‚Äúand you must come with me. It will be such a weight off my mind, for I have to go to town day after tomorrow and how can I face your Aunt Josephine without a willowware platter? It would be even worse than the time I had to confess about jumping on the spare room bed.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Both girls laughed over the old memory‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ concerning which, if any of my readers are ignorant and curious, I must refer them to Anne‚Äôs earlier history.</p>
			<p>The next afternoon the girls fared forth on their platter hunting expedition. It was ten miles to Spencervale and the day was not especially pleasant for travelling. It was very warm and windless, and the dust on the road was such as might have been expected after six weeks of dry weather.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, I do wish it would rain soon,‚Äù sighed Anne. ‚ÄúEverything is so parched up. The poor fields just seem pitiful to me and the trees seem to be stretching out their hands pleading for rain. As for my garden, it hurts me every time I go into it. I suppose I shouldn‚Äôt complain about a garden when the farmers‚Äô crops are suffering so. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison says his pastures are so scorched up that his poor cows can hardly get a bite to eat and he feels guilty of cruelty to animals every time he meets their eyes.‚Äù</p>
			<p>After a wearisome drive the girls reached Spencervale and turned down the ‚ÄúTory‚Äù Road‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ a green, solitary highway where the strips of grass between the wheel tracks bore evidence to lack of travel. Along most of its extent it was lined with thickset young spruces crowding down to the roadway, with here and there a break where the back field of a Spencervale farm came out to the fence or an expanse of stumps was aflame with fireweed and golden rod.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy is it called the Tory Road?‚Äù asked Anne.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝAllan says it is on the principle of calling a place a grove because there are no trees in it,‚Äù said Diana, ‚Äúfor nobody lives along the road except the Copp girls and old Martin Bovyer at the further end, who is a Liberal. The Tory government ran the road through when they were in power just to show they were doing something.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Diana‚Äôs father was a Liberal, for which reason she and Anne never discussed politics. Green Gables folk had always been Conservatives.</p>
			<p>Finally the girls came to the old Copp homestead‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ a place of such exceeding external neatness that even Green Gables would have suffered by contrast. The house was a very old fashioned one, situated on a slope, which fact had necessitated the building of a stone basement under one end. The house and outbuildings were all whitewashed to a condition of blinding perfection and not a weed was visible in the prim kitchen garden surrounded by its white paling.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe shades are all down,‚Äù said Diana ruefully. ‚ÄúI believe that nobody is home.‚Äù</p>
			<p>This proved to be the case. The girls looked at each other in perplexity.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know what to do,‚Äù said Anne. ‚ÄúIf I were sure the platter was the right kind I would not mind waiting until they came home. But if it isn‚Äôt it may be too late to go to Wesley Keyson‚Äôs afterwards.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Diana looked at a certain little square window over the basement.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is the pantry window, I feel sure,‚Äù she said, ‚Äúbecause this house is just like Uncle Charles‚Äô at Newbridge, and that is their pantry window. The shade isn‚Äôt down, so if we climbed up on the roof of that little house we could look into the pantry and might be able to see the platter. Do you think it would be any harm?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I don‚Äôt think so,‚Äù decided Anne, after due reflection, ‚Äúsince our motive is not idle curiosity.‚Äù</p>
			<p>This important point of ethics being settled, Anne prepared to mount the aforesaid ‚Äúlittle house,‚Äù a construction of lathes, with a peaked roof, which had in times past served as a habitation for ducks. The Copp girls had given up keeping ducks‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äúbecause they were such untidy birds‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and the house had not been in use for some years, save as an abode of correction for setting hens. Although scrupulously whitewashed it had become somewhat shaky, and Anne felt rather dubious as she scrambled up from the vantage point of a keg placed on a box.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm afraid it won‚Äôt bear my weight,‚Äù she said as she gingerly stepped on the roof.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLean on the window sill,‚Äù advised Diana, and Anne accordingly leaned. Much to her delight, she saw, as she peered through the pane, a willowware platter, exactly such as she was in quest of, on the shelf in front of the window. So much she saw before the catastrophe came. In her joy Anne forgot the precarious nature of her footing, incautiously ceased to lean on the window sill, gave an impulsive little hop of pleasure‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and the next moment she had crashed through the roof up to her armpits, and there she hung, quite unable to extricate herself. Diana dashed into the duck house and, seizing her unfortunate friend by the waist, tried to draw her down.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOw‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ don‚Äôt,‚Äù shrieked poor Anne. ‚ÄúThere are some long splinters sticking into me. See if you can put something under my feet‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ then perhaps I can draw myself up.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Diana hastily dragged in the previously mentioned keg and Anne found that it was just sufficiently high to furnish a secure resting place for her feet. But she could not release herself.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCould I pull you out if I crawled up?‚Äù suggested Diana.</p>
			<p>Anne shook her head hopelessly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ the splinters hurt too badly. If you can find an axe you might chop me out, though. Oh dear, I do really begin to believe that I <em>was</em> born under an ill-omened star.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Diana searched faithfully but no axe was to be found.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll have to go for help,‚Äù she said, returning to the prisoner.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, indeed, you won‚Äôt,‚Äù said Anne vehemently. ‚ÄúIf you do the story of this will get out everywhere and I shall be ashamed to show my face. No, we must just wait until the Copp girls come home and bind them to secrecy. They‚Äôll know where the axe is and get me out. I‚Äôm not uncomfortable as long as I keep perfectly still‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ not uncomfortable in <em>body</em> I mean. I wonder what the Copp girls value this house at. I shall have to pay for the damage I‚Äôve done, but I wouldn‚Äôt mind that if I were only sure they would understand my motive in peeping in at their pantry window. My sole comfort is that the platter is just the kind I want and if Miss Copp will only sell it to me I shall be resigned to what has happened.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat if the Copp girls don‚Äôt come home until after night‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ or till tomorrow?‚Äù suggested Diana.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf they‚Äôre not back by sunset you‚Äôll have to go for other assistance, I suppose,‚Äù said Anne reluctantly, ‚Äúbut you mustn‚Äôt go until you really have to. Oh dear, this is a dreadful predicament. I wouldn‚Äôt mind my misfortunes so much if they were romantic, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMorgan‚Äôs heroines‚Äô always are, but they are always just simply ridiculous. Fancy what the Copp girls will think when they drive into their yard and see a girl‚Äôs head and shoulders sticking out of the roof of one of their outhouses. Listen‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ is that a wagon? No, Diana, I believe it is thunder.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Thunder it was undoubtedly, and Diana, having made a hasty pilgrimage around the house, returned to announce that a very black cloud was rising rapidly in the northwest.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI believe we‚Äôre going to have a heavy thundershower,‚Äù she exclaimed in dismay. ‚ÄúOh, Anne, what will we do?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe must prepare for it,‚Äù said Anne tranquilly. A thunderstorm seemed a trifle in comparison with what had already happened. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôd better drive the horse and buggy into that open shed. Fortunately my parasol is in the buggy. Here‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ take my hat with you. Marilla told me I was a goose to put on my best hat to come to the Tory Road and she was right, as she always is.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Diana untied the pony and drove into the shed, just as the first heavy drops of rain fell. There she sat and watched the resulting downpour, which was so thick and heavy that she could hardly see Anne through it, holding the parasol bravely over her bare head. There was not a great deal of thunder, but for the best part of an hour the rain came merrily down. Occasionally Anne slanted back her parasol and waved an encouraging hand to her friend; but conversation at that distance and under the circumstances was quite out of the question. Finally the rain ceased, the sun came out, and Diana ventured across the puddles of the yard.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid you get very wet?‚Äù she asked anxiously.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, no,‚Äù returned Anne cheerfully. ‚ÄúMy head and shoulders are quite dry and my skirt is only a little damp where the rain beat through the lathes. Don‚Äôt pity me, Diana, for I haven‚Äôt minded it at all. I kept thinking how much good the rain will do and how glad my garden must be for it, and imagining what the flowers and buds would think when the drops began to fall. I imagined out a most interesting dialogue between the asters and the sweet peas and the wild canaries in the lilac bush and the guardian spirit of the garden. When I go home I mean to write it down. I wish I had a pencil and paper to do it now, because I daresay I‚Äôll forget the best parts before I reach home.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Diana the faithful had a pencil and discovered a sheet of wrapping paper in the box of the buggy. Anne folded up her dripping parasol, put on her hat, spread the wrapping paper on a shingle Diana handed up, and wrote out her garden idyl under conditions that could hardly be considered as favourable to literature. Nevertheless, the result was quite pretty, and Diana was ‚Äúenraptured‚Äù when Anne read it to her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, Anne, it‚Äôs sweet‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ just sweet. <em>Do</em> send it to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Canadian Woman</i>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne shook her head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, no, it wouldn‚Äôt be suitable at all. There is no <em>plot</em> in it, you see. It‚Äôs just a string of fancies. I like writing such things, but of course nothing of the sort would ever do for publication, for editors insist on plots, so Priscilla says. Oh, there‚Äôs Miss Sarah Copp now. <em>Please</em>, Diana, go and explain.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Miss Sarah Copp was a small person, garbed in shabby black, with a hat chosen less for vain adornment than for qualities that would wear well. She looked as amazed as might be expected on seeing the curious tableau in her yard, but when she heard Diana‚Äôs explanation she was all sympathy. She hurriedly unlocked the back door, produced the axe, and with a few skilfull blows set Anne free. The latter, somewhat tired and stiff, ducked down into the interior of her prison and thankfully emerged into liberty once more.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMiss Copp,‚Äù she said earnestly. ‚ÄúI assure you I looked into your pantry window <em>only</em> to discover if you had a willowware platter. I didn‚Äôt see anything else‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI didn‚Äôt <em>look</em> for anything else.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBless you, that‚Äôs all right,‚Äù said Miss Sarah amiably. ‚ÄúYou needn‚Äôt worry‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs no harm done. Thank goodness, we Copps keep our pantries presentable at all times and don‚Äôt care who sees into them. As for that old duckhouse, I‚Äôm glad it‚Äôs smashed, for maybe now Martha will agree to having it taken down. She never would before for fear it might come in handy sometime and I‚Äôve had to whitewash it every spring. But you might as well argue with a post as with Martha. She went to town today‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI drove her to the station. And you want to buy my platter. Well, what will you give for it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTwenty dollars,‚Äù said Anne, who was never meant to match business wits with a Copp, or she would not have offered her price at the start.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I‚Äôll see,‚Äù said Miss Sarah cautiously. ‚ÄúThat platter is mine fortunately, or I‚Äôd never dare to sell it when Martha wasn‚Äôt here. As it is, I daresay she‚Äôll raise a fuss. Martha‚Äôs the boss of this establishment I can tell you. I‚Äôm getting awful tired of living under another woman‚Äôs thumb. But come in, come in. You must be real tired and hungry. I‚Äôll do the best I can for you in the way of tea but I warn you not to expect anything but bread and butter and some cowcumbers. Martha locked up all the cake and cheese and preserves afore she went. She always does, because she says I‚Äôm too extravagant with them if company comes.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The girls were hungry enough to do justice to any fare, and they enjoyed Miss Sarah‚Äôs excellent bread and butter and ‚Äúcowcumbers‚Äù thoroughly. When the meal was over Miss Sarah said,</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know as I mind selling the platter. But it‚Äôs worth twenty-five dollars. It‚Äôs a very old platter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Diana gave Anne‚Äôs foot a gentle kick under the table, meaning, ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt agree‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe‚Äôll let it go for twenty if you hold out.‚Äù But Anne was not minded to take any chances in regard to that precious platter. She promptly agreed to give twenty-five and Miss Sarah looked as if she felt sorry she hadn‚Äôt asked for thirty.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I guess you may have it. I want all the money I can scare up just now. The fact is‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù Miss Sarah threw up her head importantly, with a proud flush on her thin cheeks‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI‚Äôm going to be married‚ÅÝ‚Äîto Luther Wallace. He wanted me twenty years ago. I liked him real well but he was poor then and father packed him off. I s‚Äôpose I shouldn‚Äôt have let him go so meek but I was timid and frightened of father. Besides, I didn‚Äôt know men were so skurse.‚Äù</p>
			<p>When the girls were safely away, Diana driving and Anne holding the coveted platter carefully on her lap, the green, rain-freshened solitudes of the Tory Road were enlivened by ripples of girlish laughter.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll amuse your Aunt Josephine with the ‚Äòstrange eventful history‚Äô of this afternoon when I go to town tomorrow. We‚Äôve had a rather trying time but it‚Äôs over now. I‚Äôve got the platter, and that rain has laid the dust beautifully. So ‚Äòall‚Äôs well that ends well.‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôre not home yet,‚Äù said Diana rather pessimistically, ‚Äúand there‚Äôs no telling what may happen before we are. You‚Äôre such a girl to have adventures, Anne.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHaving adventures comes natural to some people,‚Äù said Anne serenely. ‚ÄúYou just have a gift for them or you haven‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
