<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV: A Danger Averted</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Danger Averted</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Anne, walking home from the post office one Friday evening, was joined by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde, who was as usual cumbered with all the cares of church and state.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve just been down to Timothy Cotton‚Äôs to see if I could get Alice Louise to help me for a few days,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúI had her last week, for, though she‚Äôs too slow to stop quick, she‚Äôs better than nobody. But she‚Äôs sick and can‚Äôt come. Timothy‚Äôs sitting there, too, coughing and complaining. He‚Äôs been dying for ten years and he‚Äôll go on dying for ten years more. That kind can‚Äôt even die and have done with it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ they can‚Äôt stick to anything, even to being sick, long enough to finish it. They‚Äôre a terrible shiftless family and what is to become of them I don‚Äôt know, but perhaps Providence does.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde sighed as if she rather doubted the extent of Providential knowledge on the subject.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMarilla was in about her eyes again Tuesday, wasn‚Äôt she? What did the specialist think of them?‚Äù she continued.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe was much pleased,‚Äù said Anne brightly. ‚ÄúHe says there is a great improvement in them and he thinks the danger of her losing her sight completely is past. But he says she‚Äôll never be able to read much or do any fine handwork again. How are your preparations for your bazaar coming on?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The Ladies‚Äô Aid Society was preparing for a fair and supper, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde was the head and front of the enterprise.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPretty well‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and that reminds me. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAllan thinks it would be nice to fix up a booth like an old-time kitchen and serve a supper of baked beans, doughnuts, pie, and so on. We‚Äôre collecting old-fashioned fixings everywhere. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSimon Fletcher is going to lend us her mother‚Äôs braided rugs and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLevi Boulter some old chairs and Aunt Mary Shaw will lend us her cupboard with the glass doors. I suppose Marilla will let us have her brass candlesticks? And we want all the old dishes we can get. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAllan is specially set on having a real blue willow ware platter if we can find one. But nobody seems to have one. Do you know where we could get one?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMiss Josephine Barry has one. I‚Äôll write and ask her if she‚Äôll lend it for the occasion,‚Äù said Anne.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I wish you would. I guess we‚Äôll have the supper in about a fortnight‚Äôs time. Uncle Abe Andrews is prophesying rain and storms for about that time; and that‚Äôs a pretty sure sign we‚Äôll have fine weather.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The said ‚ÄúUncle Abe,‚Äù it may be mentioned, was at least like other prophets in that he had small honour in his own country. He was, in fact, considered in the light of a standing joke, for few of his weather predictions were ever fulfilled. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝElisha Wright, who laboured under the impression that he was a local wit, used to say that nobody in Avonlea ever thought of looking in the Charlottetown dailies for weather probabilities. No; they just asked Uncle Abe what it was going to be tomorrow and expected the opposite. Nothing daunted, Uncle Abe kept on prophesying.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe want to have the fair over before the election comes off,‚Äù continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde, ‚Äúfor the candidates will be sure to come and spend lots of money. The Tories are bribing right and left, so they might as well be given a chance to spend their money honestly for once.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne was a red-hot Conservative, out of loyalty to Matthew‚Äôs memory, but she said nothing. She knew better than to get <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde started on politics.</p>
			<p>She had a letter for Marilla, postmarked from a town in British Columbia.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs probably from the children‚Äôs uncle,‚Äù she said excitedly, when she got home. ‚ÄúOh, Marilla, I wonder what he says about them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe best plan might be to open it and see,‚Äù said Marilla curtly. A close observer might have thought that she was excited also, but she would rather have died than show it.</p>
			<p>Anne tore open the letter and glanced over the somewhat untidy and poorly written contents.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe says he can‚Äôt take the children this spring‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ he‚Äôs been sick most of the winter and his wedding is put off. He wants to know if we can keep them till the fall and he‚Äôll try and take them then. We will, of course, won‚Äôt we Marilla?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt see that there is anything else for us to do,‚Äù said Marilla rather grimly, although she felt a secret relief. ‚ÄúAnyhow they‚Äôre not so much trouble as they were‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ or else we‚Äôve got used to them. Davy has improved a great deal.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHis <em>manners</em> are certainly much better,‚Äù said Anne cautiously, as if she were not prepared to say as much for his morals.</p>
			<p>Anne had come home from school the previous evening, to find Marilla away at an Aid meeting, Dora asleep on the kitchen sofa, and Davy in the sitting room closet, blissfully absorbing the contents of a jar of Marilla‚Äôs famous yellow plum preserves‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äúcompany jam,‚Äù Davy called it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ which he had been forbidden to touch. He looked very guilty when Anne pounced on him and whisked him out of the closet.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDavy Keith, don‚Äôt you know that it is very wrong of you to be eating that jam, when you were told never to meddle with anything in <em>that</em> closet?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, I knew it was wrong,‚Äù admitted Davy uncomfortably, ‚Äúbut plum jam is awful nice, Anne. I just peeped in and it looked so good I thought I‚Äôd take just a weeny taste. I stuck my finger in‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Anne groaned‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äúand licked it clean. And it was so much gooder than I‚Äôd ever thought that I got a spoon and just <em>sailed in</em>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne gave him such a serious lecture on the sin of stealing plum jam that Davy became conscience stricken and promised with repentant kisses never to do it again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnyhow, there‚Äôll be plenty of jam in heaven, that‚Äôs one comfort,‚Äù he said complacently.</p>
			<p>Anne nipped a smile in the bud.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPerhaps there will‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ if we want it,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúBut what makes you think so?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, it‚Äôs in the catechism,‚Äù said Davy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, no, there is nothing like <em>that</em> in the catechism, Davy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut I tell you there is,‚Äù persisted Davy. ‚ÄúIt was in that question Marilla taught me last Sunday. ‚ÄòWhy should we love God?‚Äô It says, ‚ÄòBecause He makes preserves, and redeems us.‚Äô Preserves is just a holy way of saying jam.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI must get a drink of water,‚Äù said Anne hastily. When she came back it cost her some time and trouble to explain to Davy that a certain comma in the said catechism question made a great deal of difference in the meaning.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I thought it was too good to be true,‚Äù he said at last, with a sigh of disappointed conviction. ‚ÄúAnd besides, I didn‚Äôt see when He‚Äôd find time to make jam if it‚Äôs one endless Sabbath day, as the hymn says. I don‚Äôt believe I want to go to heaven. Won‚Äôt there ever be any Saturdays in heaven, Anne?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, Saturdays, and every other kind of beautiful days. And every day in heaven will be more beautiful than the one before it, Davy,‚Äù assured Anne, who was rather glad that Marilla was not by to be shocked. Marilla, it is needless to say, was bringing the twins up in the good old ways of theology and discouraged all fanciful speculations thereupon. Davy and Dora were taught a hymn, a catechism question, and two Bible verses every Sunday. Dora learned meekly and recited like a little machine, with perhaps as much understanding or interest as if she were one. Davy, on the contrary, had a lively curiosity, and frequently asked questions which made Marilla tremble for his fate.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúChester Sloane says we‚Äôll do nothing all the time in heaven but walk around in white dresses and play on harps; and he says he hopes he won‚Äôt have to go till he‚Äôs an old man, ‚Äôcause maybe he‚Äôll like it better then. And he thinks it will be horrid to wear dresses and I think so too. Why can‚Äôt men angels wear trousers, Anne? Chester Sloane is interested in those things, ‚Äôcause they‚Äôre going to make a minister of him. He‚Äôs <em>got</em> to be a minister ‚Äôcause his grandmother left the money to send him to college and he can‚Äôt have it unless he is a minister. She thought a minister was such a ‚Äôspectable thing to have in a family. Chester says he doesn‚Äôt mind much‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ though he‚Äôd rather be a blacksmith‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but he‚Äôs bound to have all the fun he can before he begins to be a minister, ‚Äôcause he doesn‚Äôt expect to have much afterwards. <em>I</em> ain‚Äôt going to be a minister. I‚Äôm going to be a storekeeper, like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBlair, and keep heaps of candy and bananas. But I‚Äôd rather like going to your kind of a heaven if they‚Äôd let me play a mouth organ instead of a harp. Do you s‚Äôpose they would?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, I think they would if you wanted it,‚Äù was all Anne could trust herself to say.</p>
			<p>The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.V.I.S.</abbr> met at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarmon Andrews‚Äô that evening and a full attendance had been requested, since important business was to be discussed. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.V.I.S.</abbr> was in a flourishing condition, and had already accomplished wonders. Early in the spring <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMajor Spencer had redeemed his promise and had stumped, graded, and seeded down all the road front of his farm. A dozen other men, some prompted by a determination not to let a Spencer get ahead of them, others goaded into action by Improvers in their own households, had followed his example. The result was that there were long strips of smooth velvet turf where once had been unsightly undergrowth or brush. The farm fronts that had not been done looked so badly by contrast that their owners were secretly shamed into resolving to see what they could do another spring. The triangle of ground at the cross roads had also been cleared and seeded down, and Anne‚Äôs bed of geraniums, unharmed by any marauding cow, was already set out in the centre.</p>
			<p>Altogether, the Improvers thought that they were getting on beautifully, even if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLevi Boulter, tactfully approached by a carefully selected committee in regard to the old house on his upper farm, did bluntly tell them that he wasn‚Äôt going to have it meddled with.</p>
			<p>At this especial meeting they intended to draw up a petition to the school trustees, humbly praying that a fence be put around the school grounds; and a plan was also to be discussed for planting a few ornamental trees by the church, if the funds of the society would permit of it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ for, as Anne said, there was no use in starting another subscription as long as the hall remained blue. The members were assembled in the Andrews‚Äô parlour and Jane was already on her feet to move the appointment of a committee which should find out and report on the price of said trees, when Gertie Pye swept in, pompadoured and frilled within an inch of her life. Gertie had a habit of being late‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚Äúto make her entrance more effective,‚Äù spiteful people said. Gertie‚Äôs entrance in this instance was certainly effective, for she paused dramatically on the middle of the floor, threw up her hands, rolled her eyes, and exclaimed,</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve just heard something perfectly awful. What <em>do</em> you think? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJudson Parker <em>is going to rent all the road fence of his farm to a patent medicine company to paint advertisements on</em>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>For once in her life Gertie Pye made all the sensation she desired. If she had thrown a bomb among the complacent Improvers she could hardly have made more.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt <em>can‚Äôt</em> be true,‚Äù said Anne blankly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs just what <em>I</em> said when I heard it first, don‚Äôt you know,‚Äù said Gertie, who was enjoying herself hugely. ‚Äú<em>I</em> said it couldn‚Äôt be true‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ that Judson Parker wouldn‚Äôt have the <em>heart</em> to do it, don‚Äôt you know. But father met him this afternoon and asked him about it and he said it <em>was</em> true. Just fancy! His farm is side-on to the Newbridge road and how perfectly awful it will look to see advertisements of pills and plasters all along it, don‚Äôt you know?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The Improvers <em>did</em> know, all too well. Even the least imaginative among them could picture the grotesque effect of half a mile of board fence adorned with such advertisements. All thought of church and school grounds vanished before this new danger. Parliamentary rules and regulations were forgotten, and Anne, in despair, gave up trying to keep minutes at all. Everybody talked at once and fearful was the hubbub.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, let us keep calm,‚Äù implored Anne, who was the most excited of them all, ‚Äúand try to think of some way of preventing him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know how you‚Äôre going to prevent him,‚Äù exclaimed Jane bitterly. ‚ÄúEverybody knows what Judson Parker is. He‚Äôd do <em>anything</em> for money. He hasn‚Äôt a <em>spark</em> of public spirit or <em>any</em> sense of the beautiful.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The prospect looked rather unpromising. Judson Parker and his sister were the only Parkers in Avonlea, so that no leverage could be exerted by family connections. Martha Parker was a lady of all too certain age who disapproved of young people in general and the Improvers in particular. Judson was a jovial, smooth-spoken man, so uniformly good-natured and bland that it was surprising how few friends he had. Perhaps he had got the better in too many business transactions‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ which seldom makes for popularity. He was reputed to be very ‚Äúsharp‚Äù and it was the general opinion that he ‚Äúhadn‚Äôt much principle.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf Judson Parker has a chance to ‚Äòturn an honest penny,‚Äô as he says himself, he‚Äôll never lose it,‚Äù declared Fred Wright.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs there <em>nobody</em> who has any influence over him?‚Äù asked Anne despairingly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe goes to see Louisa Spencer at White Sands,‚Äù suggested Carrie Sloane. ‚ÄúPerhaps she could coax him not to rent his fences.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot she,‚Äù said Gilbert emphatically. ‚ÄúI know Louisa Spencer well. She doesn‚Äôt ‚Äòbelieve‚Äô in Village Improvement Societies, but she <em>does</em> believe in dollars and cents. She‚Äôd be more likely to urge Judson on than to dissuade him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe only thing to do is to appoint a committee to wait on him and protest,‚Äù said Julia Bell, ‚Äúand you must send girls, for he‚Äôd hardly be civil to boys‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but <em>I</em> won‚Äôt go, so nobody need nominate me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBetter send Anne alone,‚Äù said Oliver Sloane. ‚ÄúShe can talk Judson over if anybody can.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne protested. She was willing to go and do the talking; but she must have others with her ‚Äúfor moral support.‚Äù Diana and Jane were therefore appointed to support her morally and the Improvers broke up, buzzing like angry bees with indignation. Anne was so worried that she didn‚Äôt sleep until nearly morning, and then she dreamed that the trustees had put a fence around the school and painted ‚ÄúTry Purple Pills‚Äù all over it.</p>
			<p>The committee waited on Judson Parker the next afternoon. Anne pleaded eloquently against his nefarious design and Jane and Diana supported her morally and valiantly. Judson was sleek, suave, flattering; paid them several compliments of the delicacy of sunflowers; felt real bad to refuse such charming young ladies‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but business was business; couldn‚Äôt afford to let sentiment stand in the way these hard times.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut I‚Äôll tell what I <em>will</em> do,‚Äù he said, with a twinkle in his light, full eyes. ‚ÄúI‚Äôll tell the agent he must use only handsome, tasty colours‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ red and yellow and so on. I‚Äôll tell him he mustn‚Äôt paint the ads. <em>blue</em> on any account.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The vanquished committee retired, thinking things not lawful to be uttered.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe have done all we can do and must simply trust the rest to Providence,‚Äù said Jane, with an unconscious imitation of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde‚Äôs tone and manner.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wonder if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝAllan could do anything,‚Äù reflected Diana.</p>
			<p>Anne shook her head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, it‚Äôs no use to worry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝAllan, especially now when the baby‚Äôs so sick. Judson would slip away from him as smoothly as from us, although he <em>has</em> taken to going to church quite regularly just now. That is simply because Louisa Spencer‚Äôs father is an elder and very particular about such things.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJudson Parker is the only man in Avonlea who would dream of renting his fences,‚Äù said Jane indignantly. ‚ÄúEven Levi Boulter or Lorenzo White would never stoop to that, tight fisted as they are. They would have too much respect for public opinion.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Public opinion was certainly down on Judson Parker when the facts became known, but that did not help matters much. Judson chuckled to himself and defied it, and the Improvers were trying to reconcile themselves to the prospect of seeing the prettiest part of the Newbridge road defaced by advertisements, when Anne rose quietly at the president‚Äôs call for reports of committees on the occasion of the next meeting of the Society, and announced that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJudson Parker had instructed her to inform the Society that he was <em>not</em> going to rent his fences to the Patent Medicine Company.</p>
			<p>Jane and Diana stared as if they found it hard to believe their ears. Parliamentary etiquette, which was generally very strictly enforced in the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.V.I.S.</abbr>, forbade them giving instant vent to their curiosity, but after the Society adjourned Anne was besieged for explanations. Anne had no explanation to give. Judson Parker had overtaken her on the road the preceding evening and told her that he had decided to humour the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.V.I.S.</abbr> in its peculiar prejudice against patent medicine advertisements. That was all Anne would say, then or ever afterwards, and it was the simple truth; but when Jane Andrews, on her way home, confided to Oliver Sloane her firm belief that there was more behind Judson Parker‚Äôs mysterious change of heart than Anne Shirley had revealed, she spoke the truth also.</p>
			<p>Anne had been down to old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝIrving‚Äôs on the shore road the preceding evening and had come home by a shortcut which led her first over the low-lying shore fields, and then through the beech wood below Robert Dickson‚Äôs, by a little footpath that ran out to the main road just above the Lake of Shining Waters‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ known to unimaginative people as Barry‚Äôs pond.</p>
			<p>Two men were sitting in their buggies, reined off to the side of the road, just at the entrance of the path. One was Judson Parker; the other was Jerry Corcoran, a Newbridge man against whom, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde would have told you in eloquent italics, nothing shady had ever been <em>proved</em>. He was an agent for agricultural implements and a prominent personage in matters political. He had a finger‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ some people said <em>all</em> his fingers‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ in every political pie that was cooked; and as Canada was on the eve of a general election Jerry Corcoran had been a busy man for many weeks, canvassing the county in the interests of his party‚Äôs candidate. Just as Anne emerged from under the overhanging beech boughs she heard Corcoran say,</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you‚Äôll vote for Amesbury, Parker‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ well, I‚Äôve a note for that pair of harrows you‚Äôve got in the spring. I suppose you wouldn‚Äôt object to having it back, eh?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ll, since you put it in that way,‚Äù drawled Judson with a grin, ‚ÄúI reckon I might as well do it. A man must look out for his own interests in these hard times.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Both saw Anne at this moment and conversation abruptly ceased. Anne bowed frostily and walked on, with her chin slightly more tilted than usual. Soon Judson Parker overtook her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHave a lift, Anne?‚Äù he inquired genially.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThank you, no,‚Äù said Anne politely, but with a fine, needle-like disdain in her voice that pierced even Judson Parker‚Äôs none too sensitive consciousness. His face reddened and he twitched his reins angrily; but the next second prudential considerations checked him. He looked uneasily at Anne, as she walked steadily on, glancing neither to the right nor to the left. Had she heard Corcoran‚Äôs unmistakable offer and his own too plain acceptance of it? Confound Corcoran! If he couldn‚Äôt put his meaning into less dangerous phrases he‚Äôd get into trouble some of these long-come-shorts. And confound redheaded schoolma‚Äôams with a habit of popping out of beechwoods where they had no business to be. If Anne had heard, Judson Parker, measuring her corn in his own half bushel, as the country saying went, and cheating himself thereby, as such people generally do, believed that she would tell it far and wide. Now, Judson Parker, as has been seen, was not overly regardful of public opinion; but to be known as having accepted a bribe would be a nasty thing; and if it ever reached Isaac Spencer‚Äôs ears farewell forever to all hope of winning Louisa Jane with her comfortable prospects as the heiress of a well-to-do farmer. Judson Parker knew that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSpencer looked somewhat askance at him as it was; he could not afford to take any risks.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAhem‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Anne, I‚Äôve been wanting to see you about that little matter we were discussing the other day. I‚Äôve decided not to let my fences to that company after all. A society with an aim like yours ought to be encouraged.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne thawed out the merest trifle.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThank you,‚Äù she said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ you needn‚Äôt mention that little conversation of mine with Jerry.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have no intention of mentioning it in any case,‚Äù said Anne icily, for she would have seen every fence in Avonlea painted with advertisements before she would have stooped to bargain with a man who would sell his vote.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJust so‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ just so,‚Äù agreed Judson, imagining that they understood each other beautifully. ‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt suppose you would. Of course, I was only stringing Jerry‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ he thinks he‚Äôs so all-fired cute and smart. I‚Äôve no intention of voting for Amesbury. I‚Äôm going to vote for Grant as I‚Äôve always done‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ you‚Äôll see that when the election comes off. I just led Jerry on to see if he would commit himself. And it‚Äôs all right about the fence‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ you can tell the Improvers that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt takes all sorts of people to make a world, as I‚Äôve often heard, but I think there are some who could be spared,‚Äù Anne told her reflection in the east gable mirror that night. ‚ÄúI wouldn‚Äôt have mentioned the disgraceful thing to a soul anyhow, so my conscience is clear on <em>that</em> score. I really don‚Äôt know who or what is to be thanked for this. <em>I</em> did nothing to bring it about, and it‚Äôs hard to believe that Providence ever works by means of the kind of politics men like Judson Parker and Jerry Corcoran have.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
