<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX: A Question of Colour</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Question of Colour</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>‚ÄúThat old nuisance of a Rachel Lynde was here again today, pestering me for a subscription towards buying a carpet for the vestry room,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison wrathfully. ‚ÄúI detest that woman more than anybody I know. She can put a whole sermon, text, comment, and application, into six words, and throw it at you like a brick.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne, who was perched on the edge of the veranda, enjoying the charm of a mild west wind blowing across a newly ploughed field on a gray November twilight and piping a quaint little melody among the twisted firs below the garden, turned her dreamy face over her shoulder.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe trouble is, you and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde don‚Äôt understand one another,‚Äù she explained. ‚ÄúThat is always what is wrong when people don‚Äôt like each other. I didn‚Äôt like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde at first either; but as soon as I came to understand her I learned to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde may be an acquired taste with some folks; but I didn‚Äôt keep on eating bananas because I was told I‚Äôd learn to like them if I did,‚Äù growled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison. ‚ÄúAnd as for understanding her, I understand that she is a confirmed busybody and I told her so.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, that must have hurt her feelings very much,‚Äù said Anne reproachfully. ‚ÄúHow could you say such a thing? <em>I</em> said some dreadful things to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde long ago but it was when I had lost my temper. I couldn‚Äôt say them <em>deliberately</em>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt was the truth and I believe in telling the truth to everybody.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you don‚Äôt tell the whole truth,‚Äù objected Anne. ‚ÄúYou only tell the disagreeable part of the truth. Now, you‚Äôve told me a dozen times that my hair was red, but you‚Äôve never once told me that I had a nice nose.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI daresay you know it without any telling,‚Äù chuckled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI know I have red hair too‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ although it‚Äôs <em>much</em> darker than it used to be‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ so there‚Äôs no need of telling me that either.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, well, I‚Äôll try and not mention it again since you‚Äôre so sensitive. You must excuse me, Anne. I‚Äôve got a habit of being outspoken and folks mustn‚Äôt mind it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut they can‚Äôt help minding it. And I don‚Äôt think it‚Äôs any help that it‚Äôs your habit. What would you think of a person who went about sticking pins and needles into people and saying, ‚ÄòExcuse me, you mustn‚Äôt mind it‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ it‚Äôs just a habit I‚Äôve got.‚Äô You‚Äôd think he was crazy, wouldn‚Äôt you? And as for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde being a busybody, perhaps she is. But did you tell her she had a very kind heart and always helped the poor, and never said a word when Timothy Cotton stole a crock of butter out of her dairy and told his wife he‚Äôd bought it from her? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝCotton cast it up to her the next time they met that it tasted of turnips and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde just said she was sorry it had turned out so poorly.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose she has some good qualities,‚Äù conceded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison grudgingly. ‚ÄúMost folks have. I have some myself, though you might never suspect it. But anyhow I ain‚Äôt going to give anything to that carpet. Folks are everlasting begging for money here, it seems to me. How‚Äôs your project of painting the hall coming on?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSplendidly. We had a meeting of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.V.I.S.</abbr> last Friday night and found that we had plenty of money subscribed to paint the hall and shingle the roof too. <em>Most</em> people gave very liberally, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne was a sweet-souled lass, but she could instill some venom into innocent italics when occasion required.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat colour are you going to have it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe have decided on a very pretty green. The roof will be dark red, of course. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRoger Pye is going to get the paint in town today.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho‚Äôs got the job?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJoshua Pye of Carmody. He has nearly finished the shingling. We had to give him the contract, for every one of the Pyes‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and there are four families, you know‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ said they wouldn‚Äôt give a cent unless Joshua got it. They had subscribed twelve dollars between them and we thought that was too much to lose, although some people think we shouldn‚Äôt have given in to the Pyes. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde says they try to run everything.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe main question is will this Joshua do his work well. If he does I don‚Äôt see that it matters whether his name is Pye or Pudding.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe has the reputation of being a good workman, though they say he‚Äôs a very peculiar man. He hardly ever talks.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe‚Äôs peculiar enough all right then,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison drily. ‚ÄúOr at least, folks here will call him so. I never was much of a talker till I came to Avonlea and then I had to begin in self-defense or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde would have said I was dumb and started a subscription to have me taught sign language. You‚Äôre not going yet, Anne?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI must. I have some sewing to do for Dora this evening. Besides, Davy is probably breaking Marilla‚Äôs heart with some new mischief by this time. This morning the first thing he said was, ‚ÄòWhere does the dark go, Anne? I want to know.‚Äô I told him it went around to the other side of the world but after breakfast he declared it didn‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ that it went down the well. Marilla says she caught him hanging over the well-box four times today, trying to reach down to the dark.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe‚Äôs a limb,‚Äù declared <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison. ‚ÄúHe came over here yesterday and pulled six feathers out of Ginger‚Äôs tail before I could get in from the barn. The poor bird has been moping ever since. Those children must be a sight of trouble to you folks.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEverything that‚Äôs worth having is some trouble,‚Äù said Anne, secretly resolving to forgive Davy‚Äôs next offence, whatever it might be, since he had avenged her on Ginger.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRoger Pye brought the hall paint home that night and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJoshua Pye, a surly, taciturn man, began painting the next day. He was not disturbed in his task. The hall was situated on what was called ‚Äúthe lower road.‚Äù In late autumn this road was always muddy and wet, and people going to Carmody traveled by the longer ‚Äúupper‚Äù road. The hall was so closely surrounded by fir woods that it was invisible unless you were near it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJoshua Pye painted away in the solitude and independence that were so dear to his unsociable heart.</p>
			<p>Friday afternoon he finished his job and went home to Carmody. Soon after his departure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝRachel Lynde drove by, having braved the mud of the lower road out of curiosity to see what the hall looked like in its new coat of paint. When she rounded the spruce curve she saw.</p>
			<p>The sight affected <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde oddly. She dropped the reins, held up her hands, and said ‚ÄúGracious Providence!‚Äù She stared as if she could not believe her eyes. Then she laughed almost hysterically.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere must be some mistake‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ there <em>must</em>. I knew those Pyes would make a mess of things.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde drove home, meeting several people on the road and stopping to tell them about the hall. The news flew like wildfire. Gilbert Blythe, poring over a text book at home, heard it from his father‚Äôs hired boy at sunset, and rushed breathlessly to Green Gables, joined on the way by Fred Wright. They found Diana Barry, Jane Andrews, and Anne Shirley, despair personified, at the yard gate of Green Gables, under the big leafless willows.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt isn‚Äôt true surely, Anne?‚Äù exclaimed Gilbert.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt <em>is</em> true,‚Äù answered Anne, looking like the muse of tragedy. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde called on her way from Carmody to tell me. Oh, it is simply dreadful! <em>What</em> is the use of trying to improve anything?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is dreadful?‚Äù asked Oliver Sloane, arriving at this moment with a bandbox he had brought from town for Marilla.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHaven‚Äôt you heard?‚Äù said Jane wrathfully. ‚ÄúWell, its simply this‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Joshua Pye <em>has gone and painted the hall blue instead of green</em>‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ a deep, brilliant blue, the shade they use for painting carts and wheelbarrows. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde says it is the most hideous colour for a building, especially when combined with a red roof, that she ever saw or imagined. You could simply have knocked me down with a feather when I heard it. It‚Äôs heartbreaking, after all the trouble we‚Äôve had.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow on earth could such a mistake have happened?‚Äù wailed Diana.</p>
			<p>The blame of this unmerciful disaster was eventually narrowed down to the Pyes. The Improvers had decided to use Morton-Harris paints and the Morton-Harris paint cans were numbered according to a colour card. A purchaser chose his shade on the card and ordered by the accompanying number. Number 147 was the shade of green desired and when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRoger Pye sent word to the Improvers by his son, John Andrew, that he was going to town and would get their paint for them, the Improvers told John Andrew to tell his father to get 147. John Andrew always averred that he did so, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRoger Pye as stanchly declared that John Andrew told him 157; and there the matter stands to this day.</p>
			<p>That night there was blank dismay in every Avonlea house where an Improver lived. The gloom at Green Gables was so intense that it quenched even Davy. Anne wept and would not be comforted.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI <em>must</em> cry, even if I am almost seventeen, Marilla,‚Äù she sobbed. ‚ÄúIt is so mortifying. And it sounds the death knell of our society. We‚Äôll simply be laughed out of existence.‚Äù</p>
			<p>In life, as in dreams, however, things often go by contraries. The Avonlea people did not laugh; they were too angry. <em>Their</em> money had gone to paint the hall and consequently <em>they</em> felt themselves bitterly aggrieved by the mistake. Public indignation centered on the Pyes. Roger Pye and John Andrew had bungled the matter between them; and as for Joshua Pye, he must be a born fool not to suspect there was something wrong when he opened the cans and saw the colour of the paint. Joshua Pye, when thus animadverted upon, retorted that the Avonlea taste in colours was no business of his, whatever his private opinion of it might be; he had been hired to paint the hall, not to talk about it; and he meant to have his money for it.</p>
			<p>The Improvers paid him his money in bitterness of spirit, after consulting <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝPeter Sloane, who was a magistrate.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôll have to pay it,‚Äù Peter told him. ‚ÄúYou can‚Äôt hold him responsible for the mistake, since he claims he was never told what the colour was supposed to be but just given the cans and told to go ahead. But it‚Äôs a burning shame and that hall certainly does look awful.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The luckless Improvers expected that Avonlea would be more prejudiced than ever against them; but instead, public sympathy veered around in their favour. People thought the eager, enthusiastic little band who had worked so hard for their object had been badly used. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde told them to keep on and show the Pyes that there really were people in the world who could do things without making a muddle of them. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMajor Spencer sent them word that he would clean out all the stumps along the road front of his farm and seed it down with grass at his own expense; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝHiram Sloane called at the school one day and beckoned Anne mysteriously out into the porch to tell her that if the ‚ÄúSassiety‚Äù wanted to make a geranium bed at the crossroads in the spring they needn‚Äôt be afraid of her cow, for she would see that the marauding animal was kept within safe bounds. Even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison chuckled, if he chuckled at all, in private, and was all sympathy outwardly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever mind, Anne. Most paints fade uglier every year but that blue is as ugly as it can be to begin with, so it‚Äôs bound to fade prettier. And the roof is shingled and painted all right. Folks will be able to sit in the hall after this without being leaked on. You‚Äôve accomplished so much anyhow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut Avonlea‚Äôs blue hall will be a byword in all the neighbouring settlements from this time out,‚Äù said Anne bitterly.</p>
			<p>And it must be confessed that it was.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
