<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: Mr. Harrison at Home</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison at Home</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison‚Äôs house was an old-fashioned, low-eaved, whitewashed structure, set against a thick spruce grove.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison himself was sitting on his vine-shaded veranda, in his shirt sleeves, enjoying his evening pipe. When he realized who was coming up the path he sprang suddenly to his feet, bolted into the house, and shut the door. This was merely the uncomfortable result of his surprise, mingled with a good deal of shame over his outburst of temper the day before. But it nearly swept the remnant of her courage from Anne‚Äôs heart.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf he‚Äôs so cross now what will he be when he hears what I‚Äôve done,‚Äù she reflected miserably, as she rapped at the door.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison opened it, smiling sheepishly, and invited her to enter in a tone quite mild and friendly, if somewhat nervous. He had laid aside his pipe and donned his coat; he offered Anne a very dusty chair very politely, and her reception would have passed off pleasantly enough if it had not been for the telltale of a parrot who was peering through the bars of his cage with wicked golden eyes. No sooner had Anne seated herself than Ginger exclaimed,</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBless my soul, what‚Äôs that redheaded snippet coming here for?‚Äù</p>
			<p>It would be hard to say whose face was the redder, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison‚Äôs or Anne‚Äôs.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you mind that parrot,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison, casting a furious glance at Ginger. ‚ÄúHe‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ he‚Äôs always talking nonsense. I got him from my brother who was a sailor. Sailors don‚Äôt always use the choicest language, and parrots are very imitative birds.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo I should think,‚Äù said poor Anne, the remembrance of her errand quelling her resentment. She couldn‚Äôt afford to snub <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison under the circumstances, that was certain. When you had just sold a man‚Äôs Jersey cow offhand, without his knowledge or consent, you must not mind if his parrot repeated uncomplimentary things. Nevertheless, the ‚Äúredheaded snippet‚Äù was not quite so meek as she might otherwise have been.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve come to confess something to you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison,‚Äù she said resolutely. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ it‚Äôs about‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ that Jersey cow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBless my soul,‚Äù exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison nervously, ‚Äúhas she gone and broken into my oats again? Well, never mind‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ never mind if she has. It‚Äôs no difference‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ none at all. I‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I was too hasty yesterday, that‚Äôs a fact. Never mind if she has.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, if it were only that,‚Äù sighed Anne. ‚ÄúBut it‚Äôs ten times worse. I don‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBless my soul, do you mean to say she‚Äôs got into my wheat?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ no‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ not the wheat. But‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen it‚Äôs the cabbages! She‚Äôs broken into my cabbages that I was raising for Exhibition, hey?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs <em>not</em> the cabbages, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison. I‚Äôll tell you everything‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ that is what I came for‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut please don‚Äôt interrupt me. It makes me so nervous. Just let me tell my story and don‚Äôt say anything till I get through‚ÅÝ‚Äîand then no doubt you‚Äôll say plenty,‚Äù Anne concluded, but in thought only.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI won‚Äôt say another word,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison, and he didn‚Äôt. But Ginger was not bound by any contract of silence and kept ejaculating, ‚ÄúRedheaded snippet‚Äù at intervals until Anne felt quite wild.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI shut my Jersey cow up in our pen yesterday. This morning I went to Carmody and when I came back I saw a Jersey cow in your oats. Diana and I chased her out and you can‚Äôt imagine what a hard time we had. I was so dreadfully wet and tired and vexed‚ÅÝ‚Äîand <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝShearer came by that very minute and offered to buy the cow. I sold her to him on the spot for twenty dollars. It was wrong of me. I should have waited and consulted Marilla, of course. But I‚Äôm dreadfully given to doing things without thinking‚ÅÝ‚Äîeverybody who knows me will tell you that. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝShearer took the cow right away to ship her on the afternoon train.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúRedheaded snippet,‚Äù quoted Ginger in a tone of profound contempt.</p>
			<p>At this point <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison arose and, with an expression that would have struck terror into any bird but a parrot, carried Ginger‚Äôs cage into an adjoining room and shut the door. Ginger shrieked, swore, and otherwise conducted himself in keeping with his reputation, but finding himself left alone, relapsed into sulky silence.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúExcuse me and go on,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison, sitting down again. ‚ÄúMy brother the sailor never taught that bird any manners.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI went home and after tea I went out to the milking pen. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison,‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Anne leaned forward, clasping her hands with her old childish gesture, while her big gray eyes gazed imploringly into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison‚Äôs embarrassed face‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ ‚ÄúI found my cow still shut up in the pen. It was <em>your</em> cow I had sold to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝShearer.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBless my soul,‚Äù exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison, in blank amazement at this unlooked-for conclusion. ‚ÄúWhat a <em>very</em> extraordinary thing!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, it isn‚Äôt in the least extraordinary that I should be getting myself and other people into scrapes,‚Äù said Anne mournfully. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm noted for that. You might suppose I‚Äôd have grown out of it by this time‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I‚Äôll be seventeen next March‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but it seems that I haven‚Äôt. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison, is it too much to hope that you‚Äôll forgive me? I‚Äôm afraid it‚Äôs too late to get your cow back, but here is the money for her‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ or you can have mine in exchange if you‚Äôd rather. She‚Äôs a very good cow. And I can‚Äôt express how sorry I am for it all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTut, tut,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison briskly, ‚Äúdon‚Äôt say another word about it, miss. It‚Äôs of no consequence‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ no consequence whatever. Accidents will happen. I‚Äôm too hasty myself sometimes, miss‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ far too hasty. But I can‚Äôt help speaking out just what I think and folks must take me as they find me. If that cow had been in my cabbages now‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but never mind, she wasn‚Äôt, so it‚Äôs all right. I think I‚Äôd rather have your cow in exchange, since you want to be rid of her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, thank you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison. I‚Äôm so glad you are not vexed. I was afraid you would be.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd I suppose you were scared to death to come here and tell me, after the fuss I made yesterday, hey? But you mustn‚Äôt mind me. I‚Äôm a terrible outspoken old fellow, that‚Äôs all‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ awful apt to tell the truth, no matter if it is a bit plain.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde,‚Äù said Anne, before she could prevent herself.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde? Don‚Äôt you tell me I‚Äôm like that old gossip,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison irritably. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm not‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ not a bit. What have you got in that box?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA cake,‚Äù said Anne archly. In her relief at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison‚Äôs unexpected amiability her spirits soared upward feather-light. ‚ÄúI brought it over for you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I thought perhaps you didn‚Äôt have cake very often.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt, that‚Äôs a fact, and I‚Äôm mighty fond of it, too. I‚Äôm much obliged to you. It looks good on top. I hope it‚Äôs good all the way through.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is,‚Äù said Anne, gaily confident. ‚ÄúI have made cakes in my time that were <em>not</em>, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAllan could tell you, but this one is all right. I made it for the Improvement Society, but I can make another for them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I‚Äôll tell you what, miss, you must help me eat it. I‚Äôll put the kettle on and we‚Äôll have a cup of tea. How will that do?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWill you let me make the tea?‚Äù said Anne dubiously.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison chuckled.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI see you haven‚Äôt much confidence in my ability to make tea. You‚Äôre wrong‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I can brew up as good a jorum of tea as you ever drank. But go ahead yourself. Fortunately it rained last Sunday, so there‚Äôs plenty of clean dishes.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne hopped briskly up and went to work. She washed the teapot in several waters before she put the tea to steep. Then she swept the stove and set the table, bringing the dishes out of the pantry. The state of that pantry horrified Anne, but she wisely said nothing. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison told her where to find the bread and butter and a can of peaches. Anne adorned the table with a bouquet from the garden and shut her eyes to the stains on the tablecloth. Soon the tea was ready and Anne found herself sitting opposite <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison at his own table, pouring his tea for him, and chatting freely to him about her school and friends and plans. She could hardly believe the evidence of her senses.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison had brought Ginger back, averring that the poor bird would be lonesome; and Anne, feeling that she could forgive everybody and everything, offered him a walnut. But Ginger‚Äôs feelings had been grievously hurt and he rejected all overtures of friendship. He sat moodily on his perch and ruffled his feathers up until he looked like a mere ball of green and gold.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy do you call him Ginger?‚Äù asked Anne, who liked appropriate names and thought Ginger accorded not at all with such gorgeous plumage.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy brother the sailor named him. Maybe it had some reference to his temper. I think a lot of that bird though‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ you‚Äôd be surprised if you knew how much. He has his faults of course. That bird has cost me a good deal one way and another. Some people object to his swearing habits but he can‚Äôt be broken of them. I‚Äôve tried‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ other people have tried. Some folks have prejudices against parrots. Silly, ain‚Äôt it? I like them myself. Ginger‚Äôs a lot of company to me. Nothing would induce me to give that bird up‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ nothing in the world, miss.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison flung the last sentence at Anne as explosively as if he suspected her of some latent design of persuading him to give Ginger up. Anne, however, was beginning to like the queer, fussy, fidgety little man, and before the meal was over they were quite good friends. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison found out about the Improvement Society and was disposed to approve of it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs right. Go ahead. There‚Äôs lots of room for improvement in this settlement‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and in the people too.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, I don‚Äôt know,‚Äù flashed Anne. To herself, or to her particular cronies, she might admit that there were some small imperfections, easily removable, in Avonlea and its inhabitants. But to hear a practical outsider like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison saying it was an entirely different thing. ‚ÄúI think Avonlea is a lovely place; and the people in it are very nice, too.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI guess you‚Äôve got a spice of temper,‚Äù commented <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison, surveying the flushed cheeks and indignant eyes opposite him. ‚ÄúIt goes with hair like yours, I reckon. Avonlea is a pretty decent place or I wouldn‚Äôt have located here; but I suppose even you will admit that it has <em>some</em> faults?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI like it all the better for them,‚Äù said loyal Anne. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt like places or people either that haven‚Äôt any faults. I think a truly perfect person would be very uninteresting. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝMilton White says she never met a perfect person, but she‚Äôs heard enough about one‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ her husband‚Äôs first wife. Don‚Äôt you think it must be very uncomfortable to be married to a man whose first wife was perfect?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt would be more uncomfortable to be married to the perfect wife,‚Äù declared <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison, with a sudden and inexplicable warmth.</p>
			<p>When tea was over Anne insisted on washing the dishes, although <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison assured her that there were enough in the house to do for weeks yet. She would dearly have loved to sweep the floor also, but no broom was visible and she did not like to ask where it was for fear there wasn‚Äôt one at all.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou might run across and talk to me once in a while,‚Äù suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison when she was leaving. ‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôTisn‚Äôt far and folks ought to be neighbourly. I‚Äôm kind of interested in that society of yours. Seems to me there‚Äôll be some fun in it. Who are you going to tackle first?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe are not going to meddle with <em>people</em>‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ it is only <em>places</em> we mean to improve,‚Äù said Anne, in a dignified tone. She rather suspected that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison was making fun of the project.</p>
			<p>When she had gone <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison watched her from the window‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ a lithe, girlish shape, tripping light-heartedly across the fields in the sunset afterglow.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm a crusty, lonesome, crabbed old chap,‚Äù he said aloud, ‚Äúbut there‚Äôs something about that little girl makes me feel young again‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and it‚Äôs such a pleasant sensation I‚Äôd like to have it repeated once in a while.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúRedheaded snippet,‚Äù croaked Ginger mockingly.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison shook his fist at the parrot.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou ornery bird,‚Äù he muttered, ‚ÄúI almost wish I‚Äôd wrung your neck when my brother the sailor brought you home. Will you never be done getting me into trouble?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anne ran home blithely and recounted her adventures to Marilla, who had been not a little alarmed by her long absence and was on the point of starting out to look for her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a pretty good world, after all, isn‚Äôt it, Marilla?‚Äù concluded Anne happily. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLynde was complaining the other day that it wasn‚Äôt much of a world. She said whenever you looked forward to anything pleasant you were sure to be more or less disappointed‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ that nothing came up to your expectations. Well, perhaps that is true. But there is a good side to it too. The bad things don‚Äôt always come up to your expectations either‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ they nearly always turn out ever so much better than you think. I looked forward to a dreadfully unpleasant experience when I went over to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison‚Äôs tonight; and instead he was quite kind and I had almost a nice time. I think we‚Äôre going to be real good friends if we make plenty of allowances for each other, and everything has turned out for the best. But all the same, Marilla, I shall certainly never again sell a cow before making sure to whom she belongs. And I do <em>not</em> like parrots!‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
